[mycroft] Mycroft binding - Initial contrib (#11033) (#11040)
openhab/openhab-addons: bundles/org.openhab.binding.mycroft/README.md

# Mycroft Binding

> This binding will connect to Mycroft A.I. in order to control it or react to events by listening on the message bus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This binding connects to Mycroft A.I. in order to control it or react to events by listening on the message bus.
```

> Possibilies include :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Possibilies include:
```

- Press a button in openHAB to wake Mycroft without using a wake word.
- Simulate a voice command to launch a skill, as if you just spoke it
- Send some text that Mycroft will say (Using its Text To Speech service)
- Control the music player
- Mute or duck the sound volume of Mycroft
- React to all the aforementioned events ...

> - ... And send/receive all other kind of messages on the message bus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ... and send/receive any other kind of messages on the message bus
```

## Supported Things

> The only thing managed by this binding is a Mycroft instance.

Reviewer: Can you name directly the thing type id here?

Author: I didn't find a more suited world to describe "a Mycroft" (as you guessed, the world should encompass the hardware version, and the picroft version, and every kind of Mycroft running on any computer ?)
Do you have something in mind, or should I just go for a brief description behind "instance" ? I think will put a description, tell me if you'd rather something else.
"The only thing managed by this binding is a Mycroft instance. (e.g. Mark I/II, Picroft, or any other variant)"

## Discovery

> There is no discovery service, as Mycroft doesn't announce itself on the network.

Reviewer: That's a pity - actually, it might depend on what "instance" you actually have - the Mark I seems to announce itself through mDNS and I am pretty sure the Mark II will do the same. For Picroft, I would assume it does, but I haven't tested. What setup are you using?

Author: Oh, mDNS for Mark ? That's new for me !
My "instances" are Mycroft running from sources (git checkout) on several raspberrys in my house.
I search a bit but didn't find any reference to a mDNS announce. Do you have a link or something ?
I'm not very familiar with mDNS, but I used a tool to check mDNS announce on the network ; I found many things but not my Mycroft "instances".

Reviewer: Pfew, now that I look for a link, I cannot find any anymore... Not sure, maybe I had only dreamt of it. 🙄

## Thing Configuration

The configuration is simple, as you just need to give the IP/hostname of the Mycroft instance accessible on the network.

> The default port is 8181, but you could change it if you want.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default port is 8181, which can be changed.
```

```
Thing mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft "Mycroft A.I." @ "Living Room" [host="192.168.X.X"]
```

|   property    |              type               |         description                                                     | mandatory |
|---------------|---------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|
| host          | IP or string                    | IP address or hostname                                                  |   Yes     |
| port          | integer                         | Port to reach Mycroft (default 8181)                                    |   No      |

## Channels

> The Mycroft thing supports the following channels :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Mycroft thing has the following channels:
```

|------------------------------|-----------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| listen                       | Switch    | Switch to ON when Mycroft is listening. Can simulate a wake word detection to trigger the STT  |
| speak                        | String    | The last sentence Mycroft speaks                                                               |
| utterance                    | String    | The last utterance Mycroft receive                                                             |
| player                       | Player    | The music player Mycroft is currently controlling                                              |
| volume_mute                  | Switch    | Mute the Mycroft speaker                                                                       |
| volume_duck                  | Switch    | Duck the volume of the Mycroft speaker                                                         |
| full_message                 | String    | The last message (full json) seen on the Mycroft Bus. Filtered by the messageTypes properties  |

> The channel 'full_message' has the following configuration available :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The channel 'full_message' has the following configuration available:
```

| property      |  type                           | description                                                             | mandatory |
|---------------|---------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|
| messageTypes  | List of string, comma separated | Only these message types will be forwarded to the Full Message Channel  |   No      |

## Full Example

A manual setup through a `things/mycroft.things` file could look like this:

```java
Thing mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft "Mycroft A.I." @ "Living Room" [host="192.168.X.X", port=8181] { 
    Channels:
        Type full-message-channel : Text [
            messageTypes="message.type.1,message.type.4"
        ]
}
```

### Item Configuration

> The `mycroft.item` file :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `mycroft.item` file:
```

```java
Switch myMycroft_mute                  "Mute"                      { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:volume_mute" }
Switch myMycroft_duck                  "Duck"                      { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:volume_duck" }
Player myMycroft_player                "Control"                   { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:player" }
Switch myMycroft_listen                "Wake and listen"           { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:listen" }
String myMycroft_speak                 "Speak STT"                 { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:speak" }
String myMycroft_utterance             "Utterance"                 { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:utterance" }
String myMycroft_fullmessage           "Full JSON message"         { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:full_message" }
```

### Sitemap Configuration

> A `demo.sitemap` file :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `demo.sitemap` file:
```

```
sitemap demo label="myMycroft"
{
    Frame label="myMycroft" {
        Switch    item=myMycroft_mute
        Switch    item=myMycroft_duck
        Default   item=myMycroft_player
        Switch    item=myMycroft_listen
        Text      item=myMycroft_speak
        Text      item=myMycroft_utterance
        Text      item=myMycroft_fullmessage
    }
}
```

> ## Full Example

Reviewer: We have this header already above.
```suggestion
```

The channel 'full_message' has the following configuration available :

| property      |  type                           | description                                                             | mandatory |
|---------------|---------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|
| messageTypes  | List of string, comma separated | Only these message types will be forwarded to the Full Message Channel  |   No      |

## Full Example

A manual setup through a `things/mycroft.things` file could look like this:

```java
Thing mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft "Mycroft A.I." @ "Living Room" [host="192.168.X.X", port=8181] { 
    Channels:
        Type full-message-channel : Text [
            messageTypes="message.type.1,message.type.4"
        ]
}
```

### Item Configuration

The `mycroft.item` file :

```java
Switch myMycroft_mute                  "Mute"                      { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:volume_mute" }
Switch myMycroft_duck                  "Duck"                      { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:volume_duck" }

> Dimmer myMycroft_volume                "Volume [%d]"               { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:volume" }

Author: Done. By the way, should I click on the "resolve conversation" button to tell it's done, or should I let you do it to confirm your review ?
For now, I will let you click to resolve, but please tell me so if the "good practice" is to "resolve" it by myself.

> Dimmer myMycroft_volume                "Volume [%d]"               { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:volume" }

Reviewer 2: If you touch a line in the source where the comment is attached to, github automatically treats the discussion as resolved.

But i personally don't have any preferences on who clicks on the "resolved" button in case a discussion is left open. I mean in the end we have to find an agreement and when this has been achieved, I don't care on who presses a button ;)

Player myMycroft_player                "Control"                   { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:player" }
Switch myMycroft_listen                "Wake and listen"           { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:listen" }
String myMycroft_speak                 "Speak STT"                 { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:speak" }
String myMycroft_utterance             "Utterance"                 { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:utterance" }
String myMycroft_fullmessage           "Full JSON message"         { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:full_message" }
```

### Sitemap Configuration

A `demo.sitemap` file :

```
sitemap demo label="myMycroft"
{
    Frame label="myMycroft" {
        Switch    item=myMycroft_mute
        Switch    item=myMycroft_duck

>         Slider    item=myMycroft_volume

Author: Done

        Default   item=myMycroft_player
        Switch    item=myMycroft_listen
        Text      item=myMycroft_speak
        Text      item=myMycroft_utterance
        Text      item=myMycroft_fullmessage
    }
}
```

> ## Rule Actions

Author: Done

# Mycroft Binding

> This binding will connect to Mycroft A.I. in order to control it or react to event by listening on the message bus.

Reviewer 2: event**s**

Possibilies include :

> - Press a button in OpenHAB to wake Mycroft without using a wake word.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Press a button in openHAB to wake Mycroft without using a wake word.
```

Author: Done, sorry. Not the first time you have to do it, and not the last time ! 😅

- Simulate a voice command to launch a skill, as if you just spoke it

> - Send some text that Mycroft will say (Using its Text To Speach service)

Reviewer 2: Spe~~a~~**e**ch

| host          | IP or string                    | IP address or hostname                                                  |   Yes     |
| port          | integer                         | Port to reach Mycroft (default 8181)                                    |   No      |

## Channels

The Mycroft thing supports the following channels :

| channel type id              | Item type | description                                                                                    |
|------------------------------|-----------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| listen                       | Switch    | Switch to ON when Mycroft is listening. Can simulate a wake word detection to trigger the STT  |
| speak                        | String    | The last sentence Mycroft speaks, or ask Mycroft to say something                              |
| utterance                    | String    | The last utterance Mycroft receive, or ask Mycroft something                                   |
| player                       | Player    | The music player Mycroft is currently controlling                                              |

> | volume                       | Dimmer    | The volume of the Mycroft speaker. NOT FUNCTIONNAL. [SEE THIS POST TO SEE EVOLUTION](https://community.mycroft.ai/t/openhab-plugin-development-audio-volume-message-types-missing/10576) |

Reviewer 2: If this is still not working I would leave it out of the README and thing definition for now. You can keep the code, but please hide this functionality from the user until its working.

Author: Totally agree, thanks

| volume_mute                  | Switch    | Mute the Mycroft speaker                                                                       |

> | volume_duck                  | Switch    | Duck the volume of the Mycroft speaker                                                         |

Reviewer 2: Out of curiosity: What does "duck" mean in this context?

Author: In audio engineering, ducking is reducing the level of one audio signal by the presence of another signal.
For mycroft, ducking means reducing volume level temporary (for example, the music volume when mycroft needs to talk, or needs to listen).
Extended to openHAB, we could imagine ducking mycroft volume when a phone is ringing or something like that.

> | full_message                 | String    | The last message (full json) seen on the Mycroft Bus. Filtered by the messageTypes properties  |

Reviewer 2: Since this is a very technical channel I would state it as an **advanced** channel.

Author: Make sense ! Thx.

    Channels:
        Type full-message-channel : Text [
            messageTypes="message.type.1,message.type.4"
        ]
}
```

### Item Configuration

The `mycroft.item` file :

```java
Switch myMycroft_mute                  "Mute"                      { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:volume_mute" }
Switch myMycroft_duck                  "Duck"                      { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:volume_duck" }
Dimmer myMycroft_volume                "Volume [%d]"               { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:volume" }
Player myMycroft_player                "Control"                   { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:player" }
Switch myMycroft_listen                "Wake and listen"           { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:listen" }
String myMycroft_speak                 "Speak STT"                 { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:speak" }
String myMycroft_utterance             "Utterance"                 { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:utterance" }
String myMycroft_fullmessage           "Full JSON message"         { channel="mycroft:mycroft:myMycroft:full_message" }
```

### Sitemap Configuration

A `demo.sitemap` file :

> ```perl

Reviewer 2: usually we always use "java" or no annotation for code examples.

sitemap demo label="myMycroft"
{
    Frame label="myMycroft" {
        Switch    item=myMycroft_mute
        Switch    item=myMycroft_duck
        Slider    item=myMycroft_volume
        Default   item=myMycroft_player
        Switch    item=myMycroft_listen
        Text      item=myMycroft_speak
        Text      item=myMycroft_utterance
        Text      item=myMycroft_fullmessage
    }
}
```

## Rule Actions

This binding includes a number of rule actions, which allow triggering Mycroft from within rules.

```
(Rule DSL)
val mycroftAction = getActions("mycroft","mycroft:mycroft:<uid>")
```

```
(javascript JSR)
var mycroftAction = actions.get("mycroft", "mycroft:mycroft:<uid>");
```

Where uid is the Thing UID of the Mycroft thing.

Once this action instance is retrieved, you can invoke the `speak' method on it:

```
mycroftAction.speak("Hello world!")
```

The following actions are supported.

| Action                     | Description  |
|----------------------------|--------------|

> | speak(String message) | Mycroft will say this. |

Reviewer 2: I think this is the right approach to have it as an "action", since its a one shot, i.e. fire&forget thing. But I am wondering why you have the `speak` channel defined as:
```
| speak                        | String    | The last sentence Mycroft speaks, or ask Mycroft to say something 
```
The `or ask Mycroft to say something` is a bit confusing to me. I would have expected it to be a `read-only` channel then.

Author: I have some difficulties to choose between about channel state / channel trigger / action.
I agree with you, speaking is a fire & forget thing. In fact it is not a state, as it is not maintained. It is "instantaneous".
Thus, it shouldn't even be a channel.
So I could make the TTS function a trigger channel (receive) AND an action (send).
But then, and it is where I'm lost, if I choose this kind of "bidirectionnal" functionnality, it seems logical to make it a state channel (as it handles very well the "bidirectionnal" use case).

(The same reasoning could be applied to the utterance channel)

I will trust your jugement on this and remove the "or ask mycroft to say something".
Should I also remove the "bidirectionnal" code on this channel, or should I keep it as an hidden functionnality in case someone is thinking "bidirectionnaly" like me ?

Reviewer 2: Some clarification:

STATE channel:
Is a bidirectional channel that somehow persists a state. In case of your `speak channel` I would expect that if mycroft says something (i.e. something comes out of the speaker) this is represented on that channel. if that is the internal state of the speaker until it says something else, a STATE channel would be correct. So far it would be a read-only one though.
If you can define a sentence and make mycroft say this sentence AND mycroft stores this as its internal state too, THEN it makes sense to have it as a writeable state channel. However, in such a case the value on that state channel should always be in sync with the speakers internal state, i.e. if another 3rd party program would query the speaker about what he last said and this was triggered by openHAB the expectation would be that OH, the speaker and the 3rd party program will all have the same value.

TRIGGER channel:
This is a one directional channel, which is telling openHAB that something has happend and that "something" is usually well-known and one might even be able to enumerate the possible values. Usually this is used for remote controls where a button press like "long press", "short press", etc. will be modeled as such a channel. This is a fire&forget thing, there is no state involved neither on the device not on the openHAB side.

ThingAction:
This is the openHAB construct to model the opposite direction of a trigger channel. It is a fire&forget action to do something on a device which is not persisted in openHAB.

So for your `speak` and `utterance` channels it now depends on whether they change a state within the speaker which is persisted there and can be queried at any time or whether you just interact with it on a fire&forget basis.

Author: Mycroft doesn't keep the last message as an internal state. It is just a message on the application bus, listened once by the audio service (and by any other client listener such as this binding). So I guess by your definition it should not be a channel state on openHAB...
And as you say, a trigger channel is not really a good match, as the payload event should be ideally an element of an enumeration of well known values.
So, should it be removed ? But it would prevent openHAB to react on utterance or TTS event, which I think is an interesting possibility...

I looked at the Amazon Echo Control binding by curiosity and the same kind (approximately) of functionnality is implemented as channels (textToSpeech and lastVoiceCommand, the first one is write only and the second one is read/write), no Action.

It is so convenient to have it as a bidirectionnal item, that I am really at loss when deciding what to do.

My (personal) preference (driven unfortunately by my personal usage and not by coherence of concept, which has primauty) is to keep an Action, and also a bidirectionnal channel. But as I said earlier I'm OK with your decision. Just tell me what is best.

Reviewer 2: >But it would prevent openHAB to react on utterance or TTS event, which I think is an interesting possibility...

No, we should definitely NOT remove this kind of functionality. I am just thinking about how to map it best to the OH architecture.

>I looked at the Amazon Echo Control binding by curiosity and the same kind (approximately) of functionnality is implemented as channels (textToSpeech and lastVoiceCommand, the first one is write only and the second one is read/write), no Action.

That might also be due to the "age" of that binding. the `ThingActions` were introduced into OH much later.

The only thing I am struggling with is that there is no real `state` involved, i.e. something that is somewhat persisted on the speaker an can be queried at any time.

@kaikreuzer Do you have any preference on how to handle these 2 channels: `speak` and `utterance`? IMHO as he said they don't reflect an internal state of the speaker, so a trigger channel with a longer text as payload might make sense here. In the opposite direction I would vote for the thing actions, as they are fire&forget actions.

Reviewer: Difficult indeed. If I understand it correctly, both `speak` and `utterance` channels provide strings also when the user directly uses the MyCroft - and those are the events you'd like to react upon. I would say that "last utterance" can be indeed seen as a state - even if not stored on the device itself, but it can be helpful to have it in a state within openHAB, e.g. to also display it in a UI. 
As such an item can then also be used to send a text (as a command, which then would also directly become the state of the item), I would argue that there is no need for an additional action as it wouldn't bring any additional benefit.

Reviewer 2: >I would say that "last utterance" can be indeed seen as a state - even if not stored on the device itself, but it can be helpful to have it in a state within openHAB, e.g. to also display it in a UI.

Showing it in the UI would be a good argument for a `state` channel for `utterance` indeed!

Question to @dalgwen: Does the same hold for the `speak` channel? I.e. if you interact with the speaker only, do you get that information about what it last said in openHAB? If so, I would also create a `state` channel for it. If the openHAB channel can only be filled by using openHAB to send a text to the speaker which should be said, then I would go for the thing action.

Author: The speaker and utterance channels works exactly in the same way.
The Mycroft binding connects to the Mycroft message bus (which is a publish / subscribe websocket). This bus is a a central point between Mycroft modules (mainly "skills", "audio", "voice")
By listening to every messages exchanged between modules, the binding can updates the relative channels in openHAB.
Example in our two cases : 
- when the voice module transmit an utterance spoken by the user to the skills module --> channel uterrance
- when the skills module ask the audio module to say something in the speaker --> channel speak
The two channels, in the opposite direction (when updated in openHAB), can inject a message in the bus to recreate the same behavior in Mycroft.

> Does the same hold for the `speak` channel? I.e. if you interact with the speaker only, do you get that information about what it last said in openHAB? 

So, to answer your question, yes, they are "two-ways" channels which can be updated even with no openHAB originating command.

Then, if I understand clearly, I guess the two-ways channels are a good match ?
I will keep them, and as you advise it, I will also delete the speak and utterance actions as they are redundant.

Reviewer: Please do so, @dalgwen!

> | listen()          | Trigger Mycroft as if the wake word was detected |

Reviewer 2: Why do you offer this action? Rules can send the `ON` to an item that is linked to the `listen` channel and you would achieve the same result.

Author: My intention was to provide several ways of doing things, and in this case without the need of creating an item, but again, I agree this could be confusing / redundant and I will trust your judgement here and remove this action.

> | utterance(String utterance) | Ask Mycroft something|

Reviewer 2: I think this action is the correct way of implementing this functionality, but then I would also remove the `utterance` channel, because its not needed.

Author: Yes, speak / utterance has the exact same issues.
